---
layout: post
title: "The Purpose of an Education Isn’t What You Think it Is"
subtitle: by Stepan Zaiatc
---

### Doing homework and passing exams teach you more than just the course materials, but they also train you to be a motivated problem-solver.

“One day I’ll work at AbCellera and make $200,000 a year,” I told my
partner. I didn’t want to spend the rest of my life, working in a
medical lab, pipetting fluids from one test tube to another, running
centrifuges, only to be making $20 an hour and having to work shifts 24
hours day, 7 days a week. I wanted more varieties in my daily work,
analyzing and trouble-shooting issues, inventing a treatment or a
vaccine that could save the world, ***working−to−live*** rather than
***living−to−work***, and of course, earning a
healthy income so I could live in a nice house, travel the world, and
eat caviar for breakfast everyday. That was my dream back in 2020, a
year after I graduated from the bachelor of science program in
microbiology at the University of British Columbia (UBC) and a few
months after I started working at a medical lab at Vancouver General
Hospital. The novelty of working in the real world and making money in
the field that I studied in brought me so much excitement and energy,
and I was dreaming almost everyday how much more satisfaction I could
get if I kept on aiming high. ***Dreaming***, of course.

Fast forward two years later, an advertisement from the UBC Master of
Data Science (MDS) program popped up on my Facebook feed and it says
“\[i\]n just 10 months, learn to translate data into knowledge and drive
meaningful change for business decisions-makers across multiple
sectors.” That was my calling, I thought to myself. In less than a year,
I could be working in an office, sitting in front of a computer, writing
formulas and creating Pivot tables in Excel, and making a healthy
six-figure salary before I turn thirty. It seemed like a fast and easy
way to make my dream come true, so I applied to the program. Two months
later, I received my acceptance offer by email. My life was just about
to change for the better, or so I thought.

<figure>
<img src="..\img\blog\stepan\facebook_ad.jpg" style="display: block; margin: 0 auto" width="250" height="500" alt="UBC Master of Data Science Facebook Ads" /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">UBC Master of Data Science Facebook Ads</figcaption>
</figure>

#### The Calm Before the Storm

I took the summer before school started easy. I worked at my super
relaxing job at a medical lab until the last day of August, and spent
the last two weekends before school started going on a couple short road
trips to Seattle and the Okanagan, British Columbia’s beautiful wine
country. I was told by the program administrators to not worry too much
about the program, and to really relax over the summer as school would
be super hectic once it starts, and I took that to heart. No studying.
No preparation. Just enjoyed life. Orientation week was quite nice. They
were half days, I got to know some of my instructors and fellow
classmates in an informal setting, and of course there was a free
catered lunch. School was so far, so good!

<figure>
<img src="..\img\blog\stepan\kelowna.jpg" style="display: block; margin: 0 auto" width="450" height="325" alt="Kelowna, BC" /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">Kelowna, BC</figcaption>
</figure>

#### The Storm Arrives

The first day of classes was an eye-opening experience, as my
instructors just whipped through each PowerPoint slide during lectures
as if they were card dealers at a casino. I remembered back in
undergrad, a slide would stay on the screen for at least one or two
minutes, and the instructors would explain concepts *relatively* slowly
and provide some examples. Homework assignments were actually related to
the lecture material, not some activities that required you to study
from scratch and figure out the rest all by yourself. But now, labs and
lectures seem uncorrelated. Materials covered in lectures are just the
tip of the iceberg, and labs are like monsters, or beasts, that suck
your life away.

It was a very challenging period of my life. For the first time in my
academic life, I had absolutely no life outside of class. I was in study
mode for over 16 hours a day, studying during my one-hour commute
to/from school and home, and sometimes even listening to lectures while
in the shower. It was so stressful and there was simply no time to relax
and catch a breath. The contemplation of quitting the program came
across my mind on more occasions that I want to admit.

I know that I wasn’t the only student in this cohort that was suffering
though. Some of my classmates have young children at home, and some are
still working their full-time jobs. How they manage to deal with school
and other demands in their regular lives is beyond my comprehension, but
I know that I definitely don’t have those extra stressors in my life, so
I should be able to overcome this. Furthermore, I have a very supportive
partner who makes three meals a day for me, drives me to/from school
everyday, does my laundry, and takes care of all the chores at home, so
I can fully focus on school. I’m also proficient in the English
language, unlike some of my classmates that just arrived in Canada on
student visas, so I don’t have to struggle to translate all of the
course materials (although learning Python and R was as challenging as
learning a human language) and completing assignments like this one,
which requires a lot of language skills. My life is actually less
stressful than most! However, I used to be a straight-A student. I was
always one of the top students in class since elementary school, and I
didn’t have to study very much and still get A’s in my classes. Even my
undergrad courses felt “easy”. So why am I struggling in this graduate
program?

#### The Eye of the Storm

Finally, winter break came and I went to Thailand for three and a half
weeks. Everyday I would go to the beach for at least three to four
hours, eat tropical fruits like papayas and mangoes, get massages,
manicures, and pedicures. Some days I would even FaceTime my partner for
a few hours just to kill time. Life was amazing. I was able to
decompress, give my mind a break from trying to take in too much info in
a short time, and sleep properly for at least eight hours every night.
It was so relaxing and I felt like a human again. I also used this time
to reflect on a lot of things, one of them being my academic journey and
my future career goals. I’ve asked myself many times why I’m putting
myself through this “bootcamp”, why I’m torturing myself, and what if I
give up now?

<figure>
<img src="..\img\blog\stepan\thailand.jpg" style="display: block; margin: 0 auto" width="450" height="525" alt="Vacation in Thailand" /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">Vacation in Thailand</figcaption>
</figure>

Then one day, I heard a little voice in my head, you know the little
voice of a guardian angel that you hear when you’re just about to get
into a big trouble? It was telling me to not give up, keep persevering,
and enjoy the journey to success. It was like my *Eureka!* moment. I
realized that this academic journey is like a marathon and not a sprint,
and moreover, it’s not just about learning the lecture materials, but
also learning about the mechanics of learning and building the skillset
in order to succeed in the workplace after graduating. Learning isn’t
just about meeting homework submission deadlines and cramming for exams,
but it’s also about gaining problem solving skills, research skills,
networking skills, interpersonal skills, communication skills,
organization skills, anxiety management skills, and so on. These are
general life skills that are applicable in many disciplines and life
events. I have to keep in mind that unlike liberal arts, data science
(and other science disciplines) evolve over time, and can evolve
extremely quickly. The principles like data structures and memory
optimization techniques may always be there, but the scale of
implementation, its application, its penetration and implications on
society will change, and we as data scientists must evolve as well, and
this is something that an education can’t explicitly teach; however,
what it can teach and train are the skills that one could put together
in order to produce a meaningful outcome. To put this into context, one
person cannot save the world from COVID-19, but teams of scientists
including lab technicians, bioinformaticians, microbiologists, and
biochemists, etc. and doctors, politicians, logistics specialists, media
relations specialists, etc. all need to work together to devise a
strategy to conduct the research, development, and rollout of vaccines
at a breakneck speed in order to achieve the desired result. If these
people cannot work together, then the strategy falls apart and it may be
impossible to get anything accomplished.

#### The Storm Continues

With about five months left in the MDS program, the light at the end of
the tunnel is getting brighter and brighter each week. There are still a
few more classes left that I still need to take (and pass), a big
capstone project to bring everything together, and many mentorship
program meetings to attend, but I feel that I already have the process
under control, and I’m not too stressed out or concerned. I know what my
instructors expect of me, I know how my body reacts to different
stressors, I know how to gather the tools and resources I need to
approach a new problem, but most of all, I have a strong support network
that I can trust and that I can rely on to take me through the end of
this marathon. The friendships that I’ve developed with my classmates
will be invaluable for upcoming projects and later on as we get our new
careers in data science started, and my family and friends that have
supported me in my journey thus far will no doubt continue to support me
over the next few months and as I enter a new phase in my professional
life. “It takes a village to raise a child” is a saying that applies to
adults as well in my opinion, and I am grateful to still be a child,
with a village to lean on.

<figure>
<img src="..\img\blog\stepan\university_of_british_columbia.jpg" style="display: block; margin: 0 auto" width="350" height="525" alt="University of British Columbia, Vancouver" /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">University of British Columbia, Vancouver</figcaption>
</figure>

#### Summary and Final Thoughts

The journey to career success is a long and convoluted one, but there
are some things you could do that might be helpful to you:

-   Prepare for the school year by brushing up on basic materials that
    you may not have used in a while, or learn them if you have never
    learned them before. These materials include differential calculus,
    probability & statistics, and programming techniques.
-   Develop a routine and create a comfortable study space. The routine
    ensures you that you’re not wasting time switching tasks too often
    so you can focus better, and the environment ensures that you’re not
    distracted by unnecessary things.
-   Know who’s in your support network and tell them how they can
    support you. Your support network doesn’t have to be huge; even one
    or two people is fine, but let them know that they’re in the journey
    together with you, and what they can do to support your journey to
    success.
-   Schedule breaks and activities that you look forward to. Breaks
    throughout the day are important to keep your mind fresh, so you can
    continue to absorb new materials, and something special to look
    forward to like a nice dinner out or a short trip on a long weekend
    helps break the routine a little bit, which could stimulate your
    head to think smarter.
-   Make connections with your classmates, instructors, and industry
    professionals. These people will help get you through the program
    and get started in your career. They’ve been in the same boat as
    you, and know what it takes to support you through this journey
    better than most people outside of this “boat”.
-   Find little things to celebrate (that you don’t usually celebrate)
    so you can keep yourself motivated and rejuvenated. These things
    could be completing a challenging programming assignment, or
    successfully teaching your puppy where to relief themselves.

Do I have any regrets now? No. Do I still want to work at AbCellera and
make $200,000 a year? Of course, and more than ever! Do I think I will
succeed? Well that’s not something I can say definitively, but I am
definitely more optimistic than a few months ago, and I, a lifetime
learner, know what tools I may need in order to make my dreams come
true.

*Thank you for taking the time to read my article. Please feel free to
reach out if you’d like to discuss your academic journey, or if you’d
like to share your wisdom for learning and succeeding. Also, you can
find me on LinkedIn [here](https://www.linkedin.com/in/stepan-zaiatc/).*
